[ENH] Extend date time information to include optional UTC syntax, warn about FIF requirements (#546)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/02-common-principles.md

Describing dates and timestamps:

-   Date time information MUST be expressed in the following format
    `YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[.000000][Z]` (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute,
    second, optional fractional seconds, and optional UTC time indicator).
    This is almost equivalent to the [RFC3339](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339)
    "date-time" format, with the exception that UTC indicator `Z` is optional and
    non-zero UTC offsets are not indicated.
    If `Z` is not indicated, time zone is always assumed to be the local time of the
    dataset viewer.
    No specific precision is required for fractional seconds, but the precision
    SHOULD be consistent across the dataset.
    For example `2009-06-15T13:45:30`.

-   Time stamp information MUST be expressed in the following format:
    `hh:mm:ss[.000000]`
    For example `13:45:30`.

> -   Note that, depending on local REB/IRB ethics board policy, date time information
>     does not need to be fully detailed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Note that, depending on local ethics board policy, date time information may not
    need to be fully detailed.
```

    For example, it is permissible to set the time to `00:00:00` if reporting the
    exact recording time is undesirable.

>     However, for privacy protection reasons, it is generally RECOMMENDED to shift
>     dates, as described below, without completely removing time information, as time information can be useful for research purposes.

Reviewer: Dropping "generally".

```suggestion
    However, for privacy protection reasons, it is RECOMMENDED to shift dates, as
    described below, without completely removing time information, as time information
    can be useful for research purposes.
```

Describing dates and timestamps:

-   Date time information MUST be expressed in the following format
    `YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[.000000][Z]` (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute,
    second, optional fractional seconds, and optional UTC time indicator).
    This is almost equivalent to the [RFC3339](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339)
    "date-time" format, with the exception that UTC indicator `Z` is optional and
    non-zero UTC offsets are not indicated.
    If `Z` is not indicated, time zone is always assumed to be the local time of the

>     dataset viewer.

Reviewer 2: Should this be changed to "dataset generator" or is assuming viewer fine?

Author: I'd say dataset generator, but I don't feel strongly about it (which is why I simply accepted @effigies suggestion to make it "viewer")

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. I think it's fine either way since most people would be most concerned with circadian rhythms or time between scans, and that information is conveyed no matter what.

Reviewer: I don't feel strongly about what SHOULD be done, but just to explain my reasoning, when a compliant parser interprets the data, it will depend on its current locale, and is thus the viewer's local time. Using offsets to indicate the generator's local time is the ISO-8601 mechanism for that, and we have foreclosed that possibility. So you get local time of reader or UTC, depending on what the dataset curator thinks is more important.

-   Date time information MUST be expressed in the following format
    `YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[.000000]` (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute,
    second, and optionally fractional second).

>     This is almost equivalent to the [RFC3339](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339)
>     "date-time" format, with the exception that in BIDS, time zone is always
>     assumed as local time.
>     The RFC3339 `Z` syntax to indicate UTC or the RFC3339 "offset" syntax are not
>     supported.

Reviewer: This feels like it gives a bit too much prominence to this unsupported feature of RFC3339.

```suggestion
    This is almost equivalent to the [RFC3339](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339)
    "date-time" format, with the exception that UTC offsets are not indicated,
    and the time zone is always assumed to be the local time of the dataset viewer.
```

As I think about this, though, the value of these data are the relative offsets between acquisitions. If an offset change like daylight saving time comes between two sessions, then a user reading the dataset may calculate a different relative elapse of +/- 1 hour, depending on their own local rules.

Would it make sense to change the pattern and text to:

```Markdown
-   Date time information MUST be expressed in the following format
    `YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss[.000000][Z]` (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute,
    second, optional fractional seconds, and optional UTC time indicator).
    This is almost equivalent to the [RFC3339](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339) 
    "date-time" format, with the exception that UTC indicator `Z` is optional and
    non-zero UTC offsets are not indicated.
    If `Z` is not indicated, the time zone is always assumed to be the local time of
    the dataset viewer.

Author: that looks like a nice feature to me :+1:

    No specific precision is required for fractional seconds, but the precision
    SHOULD be consistent across the dataset.
    For example `2009-06-15T13:45:30`.

-   Time stamp information MUST be expressed in the following format:
    `hh:mm:ss[.000000]`
    For example `13:45:30`.

> -   Note that depending on local REB/IRB ethics board policy, Date time information
>     does not need to be fully detailed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Note that, depending on local REB/IRB ethics board policy, date time information
    does not need to be fully detailed.
```

    For example, it is permissible to set the time to `00:00:00` if reporting the
    exact recording time is undesirable.

>     However, for privacy protection reasons, it it generally RECOMMENDED to shift
>     dates, as described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, for privacy protection reasons, it is generally RECOMMENDED to shift
    dates, as described below, without completely removing time information, as time information can be useful for research purposes.
```

It doesn't have to be that, exactly, but the way that sentence was phrased was a little confusing. I just want to make it clear that the "however" refers to removing all time information vs. just anonymizing dates.

Author: Thanks @tsalo

    within each subject to maintain the interval information.
    For example: `1867-06-15T13:45:30`

-   WARNING: The Neuromag/Elekta/MEGIN file format for MEG (`.fif`) does *not*
    support recording dates earlier than `1902` roughly.

>     See [MEG-file-formats](./99-appendices/06-meg-file-formats.md#recording-dates-in-fif-files)

Reviewer 3: I think you might want to state that, even if it's another format, certain software packages (such as MNE) support only fif based writing. Thus, even if you read from a non-fif software, but use MNE to process the data, you might still hit this issue.

Author: good point, thanks. Added:

>     Some analysis software packages (e.g., MNE-Python) handle their data as `.fif`
    internally and will break if recording dates are specified prior to `1902`,
    even if the original format is not `.fif`.
